Topic 2
Cyberattacks
Cybersecurity Fundamentals:
A Real World Perspective
1
st edition, CRC Press, 2020
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell: 01114757888
Email: ehabkamel@gmail.com
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 1
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 2
Topic 2
Cyberattacks
According to the information of University of Maryland
research report, there is a hacker attack after every 39
seconds (on an average) on a computer connected with
the Internet. That means any computer connected to
the Internet sustains 2,215 malicious attacks every day!
WOW !!!
What is the deal here !!!
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 3
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 4
That’s it !!!
Unfortunately NO
Hackers always try out new and sophisticated ways to
exploit the vulnerabilities in the computers and
networks to strike. Newer formats and ways of
cyberattacks are always being developed in the market
to bypass the recognized security measures.
now you can WOW !!!
Cyberattack Objectives
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 5
▪ The objectives of cyberattacks may
vary from person to person and
from organization to organization.
▪ Many individual hackers attack the
computers of other organizations or
individuals to get financial benefits.
▪ An organization may steal the
information from its competitor to
achieve competitive edge.
▪ Enemy government sponsored
organizations may steal information
from other country to damage its
capabilities or steal the information
for countermeasure preparations.
Cyberattack
Objectives
Achieving money gains
Damaging the brand value of
the other party
Obtaining government and
business secrets
Warfare cyberattacks
Inflicting damages through
cyberterrorism
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 6
Cyberattack
Common
Types
Denial of Service (DoS/DDos)
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM)
Cryptojacking
Structured Query Language (SQL) injection
Spamming
Cyberterrorism
Path Traversal
Zero-day exploitation
Phishing
Digital / Cyber Vandalism
Cyberstalking
Cyber Frauds and Forgery
Denial of Service (DoS)
• Denial of Service or DoS is an Internet security-related event in which the
hackers attack a particular server running some Internet services to prevent it
from working normal or to stop the services.
Impact
• The hacker exploits the server vulnerability and sends automated requests and
messages to that server to respond. The server gets overwhelmed and choked
and stops working normal, or the service stops working due to overloading.
Means
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 7
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 8
Denial of Service (DoS)
• Inability in accessing a website
• Delay in accessing online service
• Huge delays in file opening on the websites
• Increased volume of spam emails
• Degradation of performance of services
Symptoms
• Routing the malicious traffic
• Using load balancers to avoid heavy malicious traffic to overwhelm the server
• Using Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)
• Using Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS)
• Using security firewalls
Impact Mitigation
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 9
Denial of Service (DoS)
• DNS (Domain Name System) server attack
• HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) server attack
• ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) flooding
• Network attack or buffer overflow attack
• Large files download attack on the network or server
• SYN flood attack on TCP handshake protocol
• Ping of Death (PoD) attack
• Shrew attack (between MITM and DoS)
Major Types
• Backscatter
Side Effects
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 10
Some More Details Denial of Service (DoS)
• Computers use an ICMP echo-reply message system, which is known as a
"ping," to test network connections. The system acts as a sonar between
devices. It sends a pulse, which emits an echo to provide an operator with
information about the network environment. When the connection works as
intended, source machines receive a reply from target machines.
• Ping commands are limited to a maximum size of 65,535 bytes.
• Attackers use ping commands to develop a Ping of Death command. They can
write a simple loop that allows them to execute the ping command with packet
sizes that exceed the 65,535-byte maximum level.
• Sending packets that are larger than 65,535 bytes violates the rules of IP.
• To avoid this, attackers will send packets in fragments that their target system
then attempts to piece together. When it does, the oversized packet will cause
a memory overflow.
Ping of Death (PoD)
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 11
Some More Details
• The shrew attack specifically exploits a weakness in TCP’s retransmission
timeout (RTO) mechanism.
• Here’s how it works:
• The attacker employs man-in-the-middle techniques.
• They send short synchronized bursts of traffic to disrupt TCP connections on
the same link.
• When the client sends requests to the server the attacker sends a burst of
requests at the same time to a bottleneck router, causing the router to
suspend data transmission. Packets are dropped during RTO. After minRTO
the client retransmits the lost packets, considerably slowing TCP
transmission.
• By using this method the attacker uses minimal resources to reduce costs and
effort as well as making it harder to detect.
Shrew Attack
Denial of Service (DoS)
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 12
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
• Distributed denial of service or precisely DDoS is a type of DoS attack.
• DDoS attack is more lethal than the DoS attack. The prevention of DDoS attacks
is very difficult as compared to the normal DoS attacks.
• The main difference is that the DoS attack is targeted from a specific origin of
traffic, while in the DDoS attack case, multiple sources of traffic are used to
attack the victim server (at the same time).
Impact
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 13
• The hacker uses controller machine to hack multiple vulnerable machines
around the globe. Then, all those infected machines will be controlled by the
software program running on the attacker’s server. That controller sends
instructions to the infected machine on which the hacker has already
established the control to send automated requests (traffic) to the targeted
victim machine. Then, all those “zombies” start attacking the target from
multiple Internet Protocol (IP) sources to bring the server to almost a halt.
• It is more difficult to prevent DDoS attack than the usual DoS attack. In this
attack, many computers from different parts become the part of this deadly
attack without any approval and knowledge of the owner of the computer.
Means
Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 14
Phishing
• A phishing attack is a fraudulent communication that appears to come from an
authentic source, often via email or text messages.
• The goal of phishing attack is to deceive users into revealing sensitive
information, such as login credentials, credit card numbers, or personal data.
• The impact of the phishing attack is not the attack itself, but how to use those
sensitive information to steal, modify, or even destroy certain assets.
Impact
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 15
Phishing
• Impersonation: Scammers pretend to be a trusted entity, like a bank, utility
company, or online payment service. They might claim there’s a problem with
your account or a need to confirm personal or financial information.
• Urgency and Fear: Phishing messages often create a sense of urgency, urging
recipients to take immediate action. For instance, they might threaten account
suspension or claim unauthorized access.
• Suspicious Links and Attachments: Scammers include links or attachments that
lead to malicious websites or install malware. These links may appear
legitimate but can compromise your security.
• Spoofed Emails: Phishing emails may use logos and formatting similar to those
of legitimate companies. However, generic greetings, misspellings, or unusual
requests can give them away.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 16
Phishing Cyberattacks Common Types
• Be Skeptical: Verify unexpected emails or messages, especially if they ask for
sensitive information or urge immediate action.
• Check the Sender: Hover over links to see the actual URL before clicking.
Ensure it matches the legitimate website.
• Use Multi-Factor Authentication (MFA): Enable MFA wherever possible to add
an extra layer of security.
• Educate Yourself: Stay informed about common phishing tactics and signs.
Impact Mitigation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 17
• There are three major modes of phishing used in the modern phishing
activities as listed below:
• Telephone calls commonly referred to as voice phishing, or vishing.
• Emails referred to as general phishing.
• Small text messages (SMS) referred to as smishing.
• The core objective in all three modes of phishing is to steal the identity of the
legitimate user by alluring via different modes of communications.
Facts about Phishing
Phishing Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 18
• The hacker intercepts the normal connection between the user and the web
server without any knowledge of both user and server.
• The legitimate communication link between the two entities is exploited,
intercepted, and decrypted to steal the personal information for malicious use.
Impact
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 19
• In first step, the hacker scans the vulnerabilities of the system and network.
• Once the vulnerabilities are known, the phishing action like emails / messages
/ links are sent to users; those contain the wrong addresses of your services or
bank accounts.
• In the third step, they decrypt your information for stealing purpose.
Means
• Cross-Site Script (XSS)
• DNS spoofing / HTTP spoofing
• SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) hijacking
• Email hijacking
• Wi-Fi network eavesdropping
• Stealing the cookies set on the browsers
Major Types
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM) Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 20
Some More Details
• Cross-site scripting (XSS) is a client-side code injection attack. In an XSS attack,
the attacker attaches malicious code to a legitimate website. When a victim
loads that website, the injected code executes in their web browser.
• Client-side code runs on the user’s machine (in their browser). This code is
typically written in JavaScript. Examples of client-side code include JavaScript
used in interactive webpages and browser-based games.
• JavaScript in an XSS attack can access sensitive data, such as cookies. Attackers
can steal a user’s cookies and impersonate them online. It also can create HTTP
requests, allowing attackers to send stolen data (like cookies) back to
themselves.
Cross-Site Script (XSS) (≈32%)
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM)
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 21
Some More Details
• DNS spoofing, also known as DNS cache poisoning, is a cyber attack that
corrupts DNS server entries. The attacker manipulates DNS records to redirect
users toward a malicious website instead of the correct IP address.
• How DNS Spoofing Works:
• DNS Server Compromise: The attacker directly hijacks a DNS server
configured to return a malicious IP address.
• Man-in-the-Middle (MITM): By exploiting weaknesses in an intermediate
name server’s caching system, the attacker intercepts communications
between users and a DNS server.
• Consequences of DNS Spoofing are:
• Data Theft: The attacker can steal sensitive data from users.
• Malware Installation: The malicious website can secretly install worms or
viruses on the user’s computer.
DNS Spoofing
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM)
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 22
Some More Details
• HTTP spoofing, also known as IDN homograph attacks, is a deceptive
technique used by attackers to deceive users to malicious domains that visually
resemble legitimate ones.
• The attacker registers a domain with IDN homoglyphs, which are characters
from non-Latin alphabets (like Greek, Cyrillic, or Arabic) that closely resemble
ASCII characters. (e.g., “іnvі׆tі” instead of “invicti”).
• Victims receive phishing emails or visit fake websites that mimic the original
ones, leading to potential data theft.
Http Spoofing
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM)
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 23
Some More Details
• The attacker first intercepts the connection between the victim (the user being
attacked) and the target (the page under attack) using another type of man-inthe-middle attack.
• SSL hijacking is a type of attack where the attacker generates fake
certificates for the domains of HTTPS sites that the victim attempts to visit. As
a result, the victim assumes they have a secure connection to the target site,
but in reality, they have a secure connection to a cloned or proxy site
controlled by the attacker.
• The challenge with SSL hijacking lies in that browsers only trust certificates
signed by a trusted Certificate Authority (CA). To succeed, the attacker needs
to add their CA to the trusted certificate store in the victim’s operating system,
which often requires other attack vectors and vulnerabilities, such as phishing
or cross-site scripting.
SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) hijacking
Man-in-the-Middle (MITM)
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 24
SQL Injection (≈22%)
• A successful SQL injection attack can result in unauthorized access to sensitive
data, including: passwords, credit card details, user information …etc.
• In severe cases, an attacker can establish a persistent backdoor into an
organization’s systems, leading to long-term compromise that may go
unnoticed for an extended period.
Impact
• SQL injection is a technique used by injecting web page inputs as statements
through SQL commands. Basically, malicious users can use these instructions
to manipulate the application’s web server.
• SQL statements by the attacker are designed so that they can be executed
while the web server is fetching content from the application server.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 25
SQL Injection (≈22%) Cyberattacks Common Types
• Manual testing against every entry point in the application can help detect SQL
injection vulnerabilities
• Submitting the single quote character (‘) and observing errors
• Using SQL-specific syntax to evaluate base values and look for differences in
application responses
• Testing Boolean conditions like (OR 1=1) and (OR 1=2)
• Employing payloads to trigger time delays or out-of-band network interactions
within SQL queries
• Using tools like Burp Scanner can efficiently identify most SQL injection
vulnerabilities
Impact Mitigation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 26
Path Traversal (≈11%)
• A path traversal (or dot-dot-slash) attack, also known as directory traversal is
a malicious attempt to trick a web application into displaying the contents of a
directory other than the one requested by the user and gain access to sensitive
files on a server.
• The attacker may be able to access files that should only be accessible to the
web server's owner, such as authentication data, application source code
containing usernames and passwords, database credentials, and even private
encryption keys.
• Hackers will be able to write data to arbitrary files in some cases, allowing
them to upload a back door to the site, to upload malicious files that are
automatically executed, etc.
Impact
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 27
Path Traversal (≈11%)
• Using a relative path: This attack adds a file or folder path relative to the
current working directory. For example, if the current working directory is
/home/user/public_html, an attacker can upload malicious code such as
../../../../../../../../../../../../../../../etc/passwd to access the /etc/passwd file.
• Encoding escaped characters: This attack encodes special characters using URL
encoding. For example, the attacker can use %2e%2e/%2f to add a / after every
two dots.
• Using a Null Byte attack: This attack uses a Null Byte (\x00) to bypass a path's
regular validation. For example, the attacker can add \x00 in the directory
name to bypass the validation by breaking the regular expression. This is also
known as Null Byte injection.
• In general: The attacker exploits insufficient security validation of usersupplied file names. Characters representing “traverse to parent directory” are
passed through to the operating system’s file system API.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 28
Path Traversal (≈11%) Cyberattacks Common Types
• Normalize the file path: If filePath is a relative path, convert it to an absolute
path
• Use indexes rather than actual portions of file names when using language files
(ie value 5 from the user submission = Egyptian, rather than expecting the user
to return “Egyptian”)
• Ensure the user cannot supply all parts of the path – surround it with your path
code
• Avoid using high-privilege users
• Update the version of your programming language and web server regularly
• In General: make your code secure
Impact Mitigation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 29
Cryptojacking
• Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin operate on a distributed database called
a blockchain. To produce new blocks in the blockchain, individuals provide
computing power. These individuals, known as miners, are rewarded with
cryptocurrency for their efforts.
• Cryptojackers want the benefits of cryptocurrency mining without incurring the
huge costs. They avoid paying for expensive mining hardware or large
electricity bills. Instead, they exploit other people’s devices to mine
cryptocurrency without their knowledge.
Impact
• Cryptojacking embeds itself within a computer or mobile device and uses its
resources to mine cryptocurrency. The most commonly mined cryptocurrency
in personal computers is Monero, which appeals to cybercriminals because it is
difficult to trace.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 30
Cryptojacking Cyberattacks Common Types
• Sluggish Performance: If your device suddenly slows down significantly, it
could be due to cryptojacking
• Overheating: Excessive mining can cause your device to overheat
• Increased Energy Consumption: Cryptojacking consumes additional energy,
leading to higher electricity bills
• Unexplained CPU Usage: Monitor your CPU usage; unexpected spikes may
indicate cryptojacking
Symptoms
• Regularly Update Software
• Use Security Solutions
• Be Cautious Online: Avoid suspicious websites and links
• Monitor Resource Usage: Keep an eye on your device’s performance
Impact Mitigation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 31
Spamming
• Spamming in the IT field is the name of sending junk mails and messages to the
users in bulk without getting approval from the users.
• The hackers use spamming for spreading malware, viruses, phishing, Trojans,
worms, and spyware.
Impact
• Spamming is a widespread form of malicious attacks used to send the
unsolicited messages through different modes of messaging such as instant
messages, emails, social network messages, ads, mobile phone messages, and
social groups.
• All these activities are directed to get marketing gains by attacking the users
through unsolicited messages.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 32
Cyberattacks Common Types
• The word “spam” comes from the luncheon meat introduced around in the
middle of the 20th century. That spam contained repeated layers of meat. So,
the repeated layers of messages are known as the spamming.
• Till the middle of 2018, the spam emails accounted for over 45% of all emails
shared on the Internet.
• In this spamming traffic, advertising, adult-related materials, and financerelated matters are the top three domains in the spamming email messages.
• According to the research, more than 14.5 billion emails were sent out on the
Internet on a daily basis in the starting months of the 2018.
• The senders of the spam emails all around the world collectively earn about
US$7,000 per day. Thus, it is still an attractive business for many individuals
and businesses.
Facts about Spamming
Spamming
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 33
Zero-Day Exploitation
• A zero-day attack refers to a software-related security breach that exploits
a vulnerability or weakness in a computer system or application. What makes
it particularly dangerous is that the vulnerability is unknown to the system’s
owners, developers, or anyone capable of addressing it. Until the vulnerability
is fixed, attackers can exploit it in what is known as a zero-day exploit or zeroday attack.
• Zero-day attacks can disrupt everything from personal passwords to critical
infrastructure, affecting a wide range of users and systems.
• In general, a zero-day attack occurs when a system is vulnerable, but the
necessary security mechanisms have not been put in place to protect against it.
It’s a race against time for both attackers and defenders, as the window of
vulnerability remains open until a fix is implemented.
Impact
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 34
Zero-Day Exploitation
• Discovery: A hacker identifies a zero-day vulnerability, which is an error in the
software code that the target has yet to discover.
• Exploit Creation: The attacker then develops a zero-day exploit, a method of
attack that takes advantage of the existing vulnerability.
• Attack: Using the exploit, the hacker can compromise the system, steal data, or
cause other harm before the software vendor has a chance to release a patch.
• Detecting zero-day attacks is a challenging task because they exploit unknown
vulnerabilities.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 35
Zero-Day Exploitation Cyberattacks Common Types
• Use an Effective Web Application Firewall (WAF): It filters incoming traffic to
web applications, preventing the exploitation of vulnerabilities. It acts as the
first line of defense, blocking malicious traffic from targeting vulnerabilities.
• Monitor Outbound and Inbound Traffic: Keep an eye on your network’s
outbound traffic as well. Detecting unusual patterns can help identify potential
zero-day attacks.
• Outline a Clear Incident Response Plan: Be prepared to respond swiftly if a
zero-day attack occurs. Having a well-defined plan ensures efficient
coordination and minimizes damage.
• Train Employees in Threat Mitigation: Educate your team about security best
practices. Awareness helps prevent accidental exposure to zero-day exploits
Impact Mitigation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 36
Zero-Day Exploitation Cyberattacks Common Types
• Detecting zero-day attacks is a challenging task because they exploit
unknown vulnerabilities. But, several strategies can help enhance defenses:
• Statistics-Based Monitoring: Collect historical data from previously detected
exploits. Set a standard level for safe behavior to detect zero-day threats in
real time.
• Signature-Based Detection: Use digital signatures from known exploits.
Employ machine learning algorithms and artificial intelligence systems to
identify variants of prior attacks.
• Behavior-Based Monitoring: Observe software behavior for any malicious
actions. Identify anomalies that might indicate a zero-day exploit.
• Hybrid Detection: Combine the above methods for comprehensive
protection against zero-day attacks.
Facts about Zero-Day Exploitation
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 37
Digital or Cyber Vandalism
• In digital vandalism, the data, computer, or networks are either damaged or
manipulated so that the genuine objectives of the IT system are changed
badly.
• When cyberspace is used for digital vandalism, that is cyber vandalism.
• In a digital vandalism attack, the malware either removes the useful data from
the websites or manipulates the information in such a way that the meaning of
the information is reversed.
• These acts can have significant consequences, including financial impacts,
reputational harm, and even revenue loss for affected businesses.
Impact
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 38
• Website Defacement: This is the most common type of cyber vandalism. It
involves altering the appearance of a website, often by replacing its content
with unauthorized or offensive material.
• Data Destruction: Cyber vandals may delete files, databases, or other critical
data, causing significant disruptions to business operations.
• Account Takeovers and Spam: Vandals may take over user accounts (specially
social media), deface profiles, or send spam and viruses to compromise
systems and spread chaos.
• Malware Distribution: Cyber vandals use various forms of malware, such as
viruses, worms, or ransomware, to infect systems, steal sensitive information,
or cause widespread disruption. This type of vandalism can have severe
consequences, including financial losses and lasting reputational damage.
Means
Digital or Cyber Vandalism Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 39
• Implement Strong Security Policies: include password management, multifactor authentication, access controls, incident response plans, and guidelines
for using company devices and networks.
• Regularly Update Software and Systems: Keeping your software and systems
updated with the latest patches and updates is crucial for closing vulnerabilities
that cyber vandals may exploit.
• Employee Training and Awareness: Provide regular training and awareness
programs to help employees recognize potential cyber vandalism attempts,
understand the importance of following security policies, and know what to do
in case of a security breach.
• Deploy the Latest Security Technologies.
• Monitor and Audit for Potential Threats.
Impact Mitigation
Digital or Cyber Vandalism Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 40
Cyberstalking
• Cyberstalking is a form of harassing and threatening. It is also known as
Cyberbullying.
• In this form of cyberattack, the organizations, groups, or individuals are
threatened to agree upon some undesirable conditions in relationship or
business.
Impact
• The main components used in the communication to threaten the targeted
entity include defaming, false allegations, slandering, and other forms of
blackmailing.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 41
Cyberterrorism
• Cyberterrorism is a type of cybercrime to attack the computer systems,
mission-critical data, or computer networks either to damage the cyber
resources or to steal the critical information that can pose a great threat to the
security of public lives, government systems, or even the defense systems of a
country.
Impact
• The main examples of cyberterrorism include the disruption of public utilities
such as water supplies, electricity, healthcare, and other such systems.
• All traditional hacking tools such as phishing, worms, malwares, Trojan horses,
and viruses can be used to pave the way for a large-scale and massive
cyberattack that can result in severe loss and damage to the public lives,
societies, government system, and other critical infrastructures.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 42
Cyber Frauds and Forgery
• In this form of crime, the digitally stored documents are forged to form the
counterfeit documents. This crime is increased during the recent years due to
the availability of high-tech devices like computer software, printers, scanners,
cameras, and other tools.
• Many documents used for the immigration, education, jobs, and security
clearance were found fabricated with the help of modern cyber tools.
• Cyber fraud encompasses a wide range of illegal activities conducted online.
These include identity theft, phishing, hacking, and more.
Impact
• Exploit the vulnerabilities of the system.
Means
Cyberattacks Common Types
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif
- Topic: 2 Cyberattacks
- 43
Recent
Cyberattacks
EQUIFAX Data Theft
VPNFilter Cyberattack
WannaCry Ransomware Attack
Petya Cyberattack
US Elections Manipulation
Shadow Network Attack
GitHub DDoS Attack
Under Armour Account Hack
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 44
EQUIFAX Data Theft
• Equifax is a consumer credit rating agency based in Atlanta, USA. The company
handles over 820 million consumers and over 91 million companies around the
world. The company has also a very huge database of employees working with
more than 7,100 employees. The company has many details of the consumers
such as salaries, personal information, credit card numbers, driving license
numbers, medical records, and many other such critical information.
• Between the mid of May 2017 and the end of July 2017, hackers got access to
the Equifax database by exploiting the vulnerabilities present in the official
website of the company, and started stealing the consumer information
continuously for over 2 months without being noticed or caught. The company
security team detected the malicious activity on July 29, 2017. But by that
time, it was too late for the security team to contain the wide-scale damage
wreaked on the company.
Victim
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 45
EQUIFAX Data Theft
• More than 143 million consumers’ data were stolen. That information included
consumer names, birth certificates, physical addresses, credit card information,
driving license, medical information, and much more. The total number of
stolen credit card numbers was about 209,000. More than 182,000 important
documents of the people were stolen.
• This huge data breach cost the company over US$4 billion according to a report
published in the Time magazine.
Impact
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 46
VPNFilter Cyberattack
• VPNFilter was a malware that originated from Russia.
• Initially, Ukraine was the main target of this malware, but later, it affected over
500,000 routers in more than 54 countries worldwide.
• This malware was based on the man-in-the-middle (MITM) cyberattack.
• It maintains its presence on the routers even the router is rebooted.
• It is also known as the Internet of Things (IoT) attack. According to the FBI
reports, VPNFilter malware was spread by a Russian group named Fancy Bear.
• It affects the IoT routers and network-attached storage (NAS) via multistage
infections.
• The first Ukraine blackout in 2015 also used the first-stage malware of this new
format of cyberattack.
Victim
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 47
VPNFilter Cyberattack
• This malware has three fundamental stages to attack a networking device:
• Stage one: A worm is installed on router that maintains its presence even
after rebooting of the device.
• Stage two: The body of the malware contains the code to effectively respond
to the third-stage instructions.
• Stage three: This stage contains multiple modules to run on the router
devices. These modules are the instructions to the second-stage body of the
code to change the routes, spy the routing information, stop the industrial
automa-tion, and many other functions.
• The attackers also change settings as per the need of the cyberattack to make
it more lethal.
Impact
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 48
WannaCry Ransomware Attack
• This attack was unleashed to the world in May 2017, when many of the
computers from more than 150 countries were affected by this cyberattack.
• This cyberattack is a type of ransomware attack that was initiated to extort
money in the form of Bitcoin (a form of digital currency). Many countries and
investigating agencies believe that the WannaCry attack was started by the
North Korean authorities or the agencies working for North Korean
government.
• This ransomware attack affected between 200 and 300 thousand computers
across the world. The hackers would encrypt the data files on the computers
and would decrypt them for a ransom or extortion money ranging from
US$300 to US$600. Hackers wanted that money through Bitcoin
cryptocurrency to be transferred to their Bitcoin digital wallets.
Victim
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 49
• According to different news reports, the total impact of the WannaCry
ransomware attack was equal to about US$4 billion.
• WannaCry would use the EternalBlue exploit present in the implementation of
server message block (SMB) protocol on Microsoft Windows operating system.
The malicious code (a form of crypto worm) would encrypt the important data
files on the computer and would ask for the extortion money to decrypt the
files.
• Once the demanded amount of ransom in the form of bitcoin was paid, the
hacker would offer you the decryption key to decrypt the files.
• The attack was stopped within a few days due to fast release of patch and the
discovery of a kill switch, which would stop the malicious code to further
propagate. Thus, the over effect was limited to a few billion dollars; otherwise,
the damage could have been much worse than the present evaluation.
Impact
Recent Cyberattacks WannaCry Ransomware Attack
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 50
• The newer version of this ransomware also surfaced in the month of August
2018 in Taiwan. This new variant of WannaCry ransomware badly affected the
operations of the company for a certain time. The name of that chip
manufacturing company in Taiwan was Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing
Company (TSMC). The production of the company was shut temporarily, when
more than one thousand computers of the company were affected with
WannaCry ransomware attack. The automation processes of the company
were badly affected.
Impact
Recent Cyberattacks WannaCry Ransomware Attack
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 51
Petya Cyberattack
• Petya cyberattack was unleashed in the computer world on May 27, 2017, to
target the main businesses such as power grids, gas stations, energy
production companies, banks, airports, bus stations, and other
communication-based systems.
• The main target of this ransomware was Ukraine because more than 80% of its
impact was noted in the Ukraine after one day of attack. Russia and Germany
were other major countries where the impact of the Petya attacks was noticed
extensively.
• The new variant of the Petya would propagate through the EternalBlue exploit
that would compromise the security of Microsoft Windows server message
block (SMB), the same vulnerability as WannaCry ransomware.
• Petya was named after the name of a Russian satellite shown in the James
Bond’s film Golden Eye.
Victim
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 52
• The Petya malware would use a payload, which would infect the master boot
record (MBR) of a computer. Then, it would modify the Windows Boot Loader
by overwriting it. And at the third step, the malicious code would force the
system to restart. When the system restarts, the data files are encrypted and
damaged while restarting the system.
• The estimated damages done by the Petya ransomware were about US$10
billion. The main reason of this huge cost was the attack on energy companies
and power grids. The services of those companies directly impact the services
and performance of the other businesses. Thus, the impact swelled
exponentially. The cost of Petya was much higher than that of WannaCry
ransomware attack.
Impact
Recent Cyberattacks
Petya Cyberattack
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 53
US Elections Manipulation
• Russian hackers with the instructions of the Russian government hacked the
emails and other sources of information including online services to damage
the credibility of the US elections. The main target of the Russian hackers was
to meddle into the election systems and influence the voters so that the
position of the Hillary Clinton is damaged and political instability is created.
• Russian hackers hacked the Democratic National Committee (DNC) servers and
the personal Gmail account of John Podesta who was the election campaign
head of Hillary Clinton.
• The hacking of the DNC server was done by the Russian military intelligence
service (GRU).
• The hacking of elections was already tested by the Russian hackers in the
Ukraine elections in 2014. A powerful distributed denial-of-service (DDoS)
attack was launched to disrupt the Ukrainian elections at that time.
Victim / Impact
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 54
Shadow Network Attack
• The Shadow Network attack is highly sophisticated and powerful espionage
attack originated from the China. It was a huge and comprehensive attack to
spy on the Indian government’s secret information and Dalai Lama’s activities.
• The Shadow Network attack exploited the Internet and social media services
extensively to spy on the different organizations and office locations
simultaneously. The major cloud-based and social services that were exploited
included Yahoo Mail, Twitter, Blogspot, Baidu, Google Groups, and others.
These websites were used to host malicious code (malware). When these
websites were used, the malware infected the computers and started spying
on the communication and data on the computers and local networks.
Victim
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 55
Shadow Network Attack Recent Cyberattacks
• The Indian researchers found that many computers at the Office of His Holiness
the Dalai Lama (OHHDL) were compromised with the Shadow Network
malware.
• More than 1,500 emails were copied from Dalai Lama office.
• A large number of Indian government’s sensitive documents were stolen.
• Indian missile system, Indian state security plans, and many other such
documents were stolen from the computers.
• The documents related to the Indian policy and relationship with the African
countries, Middle Eastern countries, and Russia were also stolen.
Impact
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 56
GitHub DDoS Attack
• GitHub DDoS attack that brought the entire service of the GitHub to standstill
was the most powerful and lethal DDoS cyberattack in the history of the
cybercrimes.
• This attack is suspected to have originated from China. The attack was carried
out on the GitHub services on February 28, 2018. During the attack, the server
services were unavailable for about 5 minutes.
• Conducted through the amplification vector that used the memcached over
the UDP (User Datagram Protocol). Memcached is a general-purpose
distributed memory-caching system.
• Memcached instances were badly abused to conduct this attack.
• IP spoofing was used to direct the memcached response to the targeted server.
Victim
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 57
GitHub DDoS Attack Recent Cyberattacks
• Amplification factor of memcached is 51 thousand times, so each byte of
sender data was amplified to 51 Kbytes and sent to the target.
• At the peak time of the attack, the total data rate sent to the target was about
1.35 Tbps.
• 126.9 packets were sent per second to the target.
• Akamai Prolexic helped GitHub to route traffic through its scrubbing centers to
block the malicious traffic.
• The attack lasted for about 8 minutes after the traffic was diverted through
scrubbing center of Akamai Prolexic.
• The impact of this attack on the software development community was huge
because millions of software users use the GitHub services.
Impact
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 58
Under Armour Account Hack
• Under Armour is a US-based manufacturer of popular brands of sports
equipment, foot-wear, and casual apparels for leisure and sporting events. The
company is headquartered in Baltimore, Maryland. The company has many
commercial apps and brands that contribute extensively to the company’s
business. Among such applications, MyFitnessPal is one of the most popular
mobile applications in the United States.
• MyFitnessPal has millions of users who use this application for maintaining
their fitness. MyFitnessPal was created in 2005 by two brothers, but later, it
was acquired by the Under Armour Corporation. The acquisition of the app
cost the Under Armour US$475 million in 2015.
Victim
Recent Cyberattacks
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 59
Under Armour Account Hack Recent Cyberattacks
• The application MyFitnessPal was hacked and data of more than 150 million
users were stolen in a cyberattack on the application database using SQL
Injection in February 2018.
• The attack took place in the last days of February 2018.
• The company was able to know only in the last days of March 2018.
• Under Armour announced publicly on March 30, 2018.
• More than 150 million accounts were compromised.
• The shares of Under Armour fell by over 4.6% in the trading.
• The data stolen in the cyberattack included usernames, passwords, and email
addresses.
• The stolen data did not comprise driving license, credit card, or social security
numbers.
• It is one of the top five big data breaches till today.
Impact
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell: 01114757888
Email: ehabkamel@gmail.com
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 2 Cyberattacks - 60
