Cybersecurity Fundamentals
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell:       
01114757888
Email:    ehabkamel@gmail.com
Topic 5
Key Management
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 1
Topic 5
Key Management
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 2
Cryptographic Key Management
The process of administrating or managing cryptographic 
keys for a cryptographic system. It involves:
1. Generation, creation, protection, storage, exchange, replacement, and 
use of keys and enables selective restriction for certain keys.
2. Monitoring and recording of each key’s access, use, and context.
The security of the cryptosystem is dependent upon 
successful key management.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 3
Symmetric Key Distribution Using 
Symmetric Encryption
Given parties A 
and B, key 
distribution can 
be achieved in a 
number of 
ways:
•A can select a key and physically deliver it to B.
•Third party can select the key and physically
deliver it to A & B.
•If A and B have previously and recently used a
key, one party can transmit the new key to the
other, encrypted using the old key.
•If A and B each has an encrypted connection to
a third party C, C can deliver a key on the
encrypted links to A and B.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 4
Third
Party Key Distribution Options
A and B require a
temporary session key
(KS) that will last for the
duration of a logical
connection, such as a
TCP connection.
A and B each share a
long-lasting master key
(Kma and Kmb) with a
third
party that is
involved in providing
the session key.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 5
Third
Party Key Distribution Options
In
Figures (a) and (b): A key translation center (KTC) transfers symmetric
keys for future communication between two entities. Entity A generates or
acquires a symmetric key to be used as a session key for communication
with B. A encrypts the key using the master key it shares with the KTC and
sends the encrypted key to the KTC. The KTC decrypts the session key,
reencrypts the session key in the master key it shares with B, and either
sends that reencrypted session key to B (Figure a) or send it back to A that
in turns forwards it to B (Figure b).
A and B require a
temporary session key
(KS) that will last for the
duration of a logical
connection, such as a
TCP connection.
A and B each share a
long-lasting master key
(Kma and Kmb) with a
third
party that is
involved in providing
the session key.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 6
Third
Party Key Distribution Options
In
Figures (c) and (d): A key distribution center (KDC) generates and
distributes session keys. Entity A sends a request to the KDC for a symmetric
key to be used as a session key for communication with B. The KDC
generates a symmetric session key, and then encrypts the session key with
the master key it shares with A and sends it to A. The KDC also encrypts the
session key with the master key is shares with B and sends it to B (Figure c).
Alternatively, it sends both encrypted key values to A, and A forwards the
session key encrypted with the master key shared by the KDC and B to B
(Figure d).
A and B require a
temporary session key
(KS) that will last for the
duration of a logical
connection, such as a
TCP connection.
A and B each share a
long-lasting master key
(Kma and Kmb) with a
third
party that is
involved in providing
the session key.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 7
Key Lifetime Challenges
For connection-oriented 
protocols one choice is to use 
the same session key for the 
length of time that the 
connection is open, using a 
new session key for each new 
session.
A security manager 
must balance 
competing 
considerations:
For a connectionless protocol 
there is no explicit connection 
initiation or termination, thus 
it is not obvious how often 
one needs to change the 
session key.
The more frequently 
session keys are 
exchanged, the more 
secure they are.
The distribution of 
session keys delays the 
start of any exchange 
and places a burden on 
network capacity.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 8
Key Lifetime Challenges
Aprotocol calls for a hierarchy of keys:
Keys lower on the hierarchy used more
frequently, and changed more frequently to
thwart attacks.
A higher-level key, which is used infrequently
and therefore more resistant to cryptanalysis,
is used to encrypt a newly created lower-level
key so that it can be exchanged between
parties that share the higher-level key.
The term ephemeral key refers to a key that is
used only once or at most is very short-lived.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 9
Automated Key Distribution
The scheme in Figure is useful for providing
end-to-end encryption at a network or
transport level in a way that is transparent
to the end users. The approach assumes
that communication makes use of a
connection-oriented end-to-end protocol,
such as TCP. The main element of this
approach is a session security module
(SSM), which may consist of functionality at
one protocol layer, that performs end-to
end encryption and obtains session keys on
behalf of its host or terminal.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 10
Symmetric Key Distribution Using 
Asymmetric Encryption
Given parties A 
and B, key 
distribution can 
be achieved 
using public-key 
encryption:
Because of the inefficiency of public-key
cryptosystems in dealing with large
blocks of data, they are almost never
used for the direct encryption of sizable
blocks of data, but are limited to
relatively small blocks.
One of the most important uses of a
public-key cryptosystem is to encrypt
secret keys for distribution.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 11
Simple Secret Key Distribution
If A wishes to communicate with B, the following procedure is employed:
1. A generates a public/private key pair {PUa , PRa} and transmits a message to B consisting
of PUa and an identifier of A, IDA.
2. B generates a secret key, KS , and transmits it to A, which is encrypted with A’s public key.
3. A computes D(PRa , E(PUa , KS)) to recover the secret key. Because only A can decrypt the
message, only A and B will know the identity of KS.
4. A discards PUa and PRa and B discards PUa.
A and B can now securely communicate using conventional encryption and the session
key KS. At the completion of the exchange, both A and B discard KS.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 12
Simple Secret Key Distribution
Man
in
the
Middle 
Attack
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 13
Secret Key Distribution 
(Confidentiality and Authentication)
The following steps occur:
1. A uses B’s public key to encrypt a message to B containing an identifier
of A(IDA) and a nonce (N1), which is used to identify this transaction
uniquely.
2. B sends a message to A encrypted with PUa and containing A’s nonce
(N1) as well as a new nonce generated by B (N2). Because only B could
have decrypted message (1), the presence of N1 in message (2) assures A
that the correspondent is B.
3. A returns N2, encrypted using B’s public key, to assure B that its
correspondent is A.
4. A selects a secret key KS and sends M = E(PUb, E(PRa, KS)) to B. Encryption of this message with B’s public key
ensures that only B can read it; encryption with A’s private key ensures that only A could have sent it.
5. B computes D(PUa, D(PRb, M)) to recover the secret key.
The result is that this scheme ensures both confidentiality and authentication in the 
exchange of a secret key.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 14
Secret Key Distribution 
(Confidentiality and Authentication)
This scheme ensures both confidentiality and authentication in the 
exchange of a secret key.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 15
Distribution of Public Keys
Several
techniques
been
proposed
distribution
of
for
have
public
the
all
keys
.
Virtually
these
proposals
can
be
grouped
following
into
the
schemes
general
:
Public 
Announcement
Public-Key 
Authority
Public-Key 
Available 
Directory
Public-Key 
Certificates
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 16
Public Announcement
The point of public-key encryption is that the
public key is public. Thus, if there is some
broadly accepted public-key algorithm, such
as RSA, any participant can send his public
key to any other participant or broadcast the
key to the community at large.
Although this approach is convenient, it has a major weakness. Anyone can forge such a
public announcement. That is, some user could pretend to be user A and send a public key
to another participant or broadcast such a public key. So the forger is able to read all
encrypted messages intended for A and can use the forged keys for authentication.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 17
Public
Key Available Directory
Maintenance and distribution of the
public directory would have to be the
responsibility of some trusted entity
or organization. Such a scheme
include the following elements:
1. The authority maintains a directory with a {name, public key} entry for each participant.
2. Each participant registers a public key with the directory authority.
3. A participant may replace the existing key with a new one at any time, either because of
the desire to replace a public key that has already been used for a large amount of data, or
because the corresponding private key has been compromised.
4. Participants could also access the directory electronically. For this purpose, secure,
authenticated communication from the authority to the participant is mandatory.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 18
Public
Key Available Authority
Stronger security for public-key distribution can be
achieved by providing tighter control over the
distribution of public keys from the directory. A typical
scenario is illustrated:
1. A sends a timestamped message to the public-key
authority containing a request for the current public key of B.
2. The authority responds with a message that is encrypted
using the authority’s private key, PRauth. Thus, A is able to
decrypt the message using the authority’s public key.
Therefore, A is assured that the message originated with the
authority. The message includes the following:
■ B’s public key, PUb, which A can use to encrypt messages
destined for B.
■ The original request used to enable A to match this
response with the corresponding earlier request as a
verification.
■ The original timestamp given so A can know it’s up-to-date
response.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 19
Public
Key Available Authority
3. A stores B’s public key and also uses it to encrypt a
message to B containing an identifier of A (IDA) and a nonce
(N1), which is used to identify this transaction uniquely.
4, 5. B retrieves A’s public key from the authority in the
same manner as A retrieved B’s public key. At this point,
public keys have been securely delivered to A and B, and
they may begin their protected exchange. However, two
additional steps are desirable:
6. B sends a message to A encrypted with PUa and
containing A’s nonce (N1) as well as a new nonce generated
by B (N2). Because only B could have decrypted message
(3), the presence of N1 in message (6) assures A that the
correspondent is B.
7. A returns N2, which is encrypted using B’s public key, to
assure B that its correspondent is A.
Thus, a total of seven messages are required. However, the initial five messages need be used only once 
because both A and B can save the other’s public key for future use.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 20
Public
Key Certificates
A certificate consists of a public key, an
identifier of the key owner, and the whole block
signed by a trusted third party. Typically, the
third party is a certificate authority, such as a
government agency or a financial institution,
that is trusted by the user community.
A user can present his public key to the authority
in a secure manner and obtain a certificate. The
user can then publish the certificate.
Anyone needing this user’s public key can obtain
the certificate and verify that it is valid by way of
the attached trusted signature. A participant can
also convey its key information to another by
transmitting its certificate. Other participants can
verify that the certificate was created by the
authority.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 21
X.509 Certificates
X.509
•X.509 defines a framework for the provision of
authentication services.
•Was initially issued in 1988 with the latest revision in
2000.
•Based on the use of public-key cryptography and digital
signatures.
•Does not dictate the use of a specific algorithm but
recommends RSA.
•Does not dictate a specific hash algorithm.
•Each certificate contains the public key of a user and is
signed with the private key of a trusted certification
authority.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 22
X.509 Certificates
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 23
X.509 Certificates
Created by a 
trusted 
Certification 
Authority (CA) 
and have the 
following 
elements: 
 Version
 Serial number
 Signature algorithm 
identifier
 Issuer name
 Period of validity
 Subject name
 Subject’s public-key 
information
 Issuer unique identifier 
 Subject unique 
identifier 
 Extensions
 Signature
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 24
X.509 Certificates
Created by a 
trusted 
Certification 
Authority (CA) 
and have the 
following 
elements: 
The standard uses the following notation to define a certificate:
CA <<A>> = CA {V, SN, AI, CA, UCA, A, UA, Ap, TA}
where
Y <<X>> = the certificate of user X issued by Certification Authority Y
Y {I} = the signing of I by Y. It consists of I with an encrypted hash code appended
V = version of the certificate
SN = serial number of the certificate
AI = identifier of the algorithm used to sign the certificate
CA = name of certificate authority
UCA = optional unique identifier of the CA
A = name of user A
UA = optional unique identifier of the user A
Ap=public key of user A
TA = period of validity of the certificate
The CA signs the certificate with its private key. If the corresponding public key is
known to auser, then that user can verify that a certificate signed by the CA is valid.
This is the typical digital signature approach.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 25
X.509 Certificates
Created by a 
trusted 
Certification 
Authority (CA) 
and have the 
following 
elements: 
User certificates 
generated by a 
CA have the 
following 
characteristics:
• Any user with access to the public key of the 
CA can verify the user public key that was 
certified
• No party other than the certification 
authority can modify the certificate without 
this being detected
 Because certificates are unforgeable, they can be placed in a directory
without the need for the directory to make special efforts to protect them.
 In addition, a user can transmit his or her certificate directly to other users.
 Once B is in possession of A’s certificate, B has confidence that messages it
encrypts with A’s public key will be secure from eavesdropping and that
messages signed with A’s private key are unforgeable.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 26
X.509 Certificates
Obtaining 
Certificate 
Nowsuppose that A has obtained a certificate from certification authority X1 and
B has obtained a certificate from CA X2. If A does not securely know the public key
of X2, then B’s certificate, issued by X2, is useless to A. A can read B’s certificate,
but A cannot verify the signature.
However, if the two CAs have securely exchanged their own public keys, the
following procedure will enable A to obtain B’s public key:
Step 1 A obtains from the directory the certificate of X2 signed by X1. Because A
securely knows X1 public key, A can obtain X2 public key from its certificate and
verify it by means of X1 signature on the certificate.
Step 2 A then goes back to the directory and obtains the certificate of B signed by
X2. Because A now has a trusted copy of X2 public key, A can verify the signature
and securely obtain B’s public key.
Ahas used achain of certificates to obtain B’s public key. In the notation of X.509,
this chain is expressed as:
X1 <<X2>> X2 <<B>>
In the same fashion, B can obtain A’s public key with the reverse chain:
X2 <<X1>> X1 <<A>>
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 27
X.509 Certificates
X.509 
Hierarchy
A 
Hypothetical 
Example
The directory entry for each 
CA includes two types of 
certificates:
• Forward certificates:  Certificates 
of X generated by other CAs
• Reverse certificates:  Certificates 
generated by X that are the 
certificates of other CAs
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 28
X.509 Certificates
 Each certificate includes a period of validity
Certificate 
Revocation
• Typically a new certificate is issued just 
before the expiration of the old one
 It may be desirable on occasion to revoke a 
certificate before it expires, for one of the 
following reasons:
• The user’s private key is assumed to be 
compromised
• The user is no longer certified by this CA
• The CA’s certificate is assumed to be 
compromised
 Each CA must maintain a list consisting of all 
revoked but not expired certificates issued 
by that CA
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 29
Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI)
A PKI architecture defines the organization and interrelationships 
among Certificate Authorities (CAs) and PKI users.
PKI architectures satisfy the following requirements:
1. Any participant can read a certificate to determine the name 
and public key of the certificate’s owner.
2. Any participant can verify that the certificate originated from 
the certificate authority and is not counterfeit.
3. Only the certificate authority can create and update 
certificates.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 30
Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI)
Hypothetical 
PKI Scenario
■■ End entity: An end user; a
device, such as a router or server; a
process; or any item that can be
identified in the subject name of a
public key certificate.
■■ Certification authority (CA): An
authority trusted by one or more
users to create and assign public key
certificates. CAs digitally sign public
key certificates, which binds the
subject’s name to the public key.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 31
Public
Key Infrastructure (PKI)
Hypothetical 
PKI Scenario
■■ Registration authority (RA): An
optional component that can be used to
offload many of the administrative
functions that a CA ordinarily assumes. The
RA is normally associated with the end
entity registration process.
■■ Repository: Denotes any method for
storing
and
retrieving
PKI-related
information, such as public key certificates
and CRLs.
■■ Relying party: Any user or agent that
relies on the data in a certificate in making
decisions.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 32
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
CCY2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell:       
01114757888
Email:    ehabkamel@gmail.com
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 5 Key Management - 33