Cybersecurity Fundamentals
CCY
2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell:       
01114757888
Email:    ehabkamel@gmail.com
Topic 
7
Network Endpoint Security
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 1
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 2
Network Security
Network Security Components
Communications Security 
Device Security:
It deals with the protection of network devices, 
such as routers and switches, and end systems 
connected to the network, such as client systems 
and servers.
Firewall: A hardware and/or software capability 
that limits access between a network and 
devices attached to the network, in accordance 
with a specific security policy.
Intrusion Detection System (IDS).
Intrusion Prevention System (IPS).
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 3
Firewall
▪ Firewall is a security mechanism that 
can protect the premises network from 
Internet-based attacks and to provide a 
single choke point where security and 
auditing can be imposed. 
▪ Firewalls are also deployed internal to 
the enterprise network to segregate 
portions of the network.
▪ The firewall provides an additional 
layer of defense, insulating internal 
systems from external networks or 
other parts of the internal network. 
▪ This follows the classic military 
doctrine of “defense in depth,” which is 
just as applicable to IT security.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 4
Firewall
Techniques
of Operation
■ Service control: Determines the types of Internet services that can be accessed, inbound or outbound. The 
firewall may filter traffic based on IP address, protocol, or port number; may provide proxy software that 
receives and interprets each service request before passing it on.
■ Direction control: Determines the direction in which particular service requests may be initiated and 
allowed to flow through the firewall.
■ User control: Controls access to a service according to which user is attempting to access it. This feature is 
typically applied to users inside the firewall perimeter (local users). It may also be applied to incoming traffic 
from external users; the latter requires some form of secure authentication technology, such as the one 
provided in IPsec.
■ Behavior control: Controls how particular services are used. For example, the firewall may filter email to 
eliminate spam, or it may enable external access to only a portion of the information on a local Web server. 
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 5
Firewall
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 6
Firewall
Packet Filtering Firewall
A packet filtering firewall applies a set of rules to each incoming and 
outgoing IP packet and then forwards or discards the packet. The 
firewall is typically configured to filter packets going in both directions.
Filtering rules are based on information contained in IP packet:
■■ Source IP address: The IP address of the system that originated the 
IP packet (e.g., 192.178.1.1)
■■ Destination IP address: The IP address of the system the IP packet 
is trying to reach (e.g., 192.168.1.2)
■■ Source and destination transport-level address: The transport
level (e.g., TCP or UDP) port number, which defines applications such 
as SNMP or TELNET
■■ IP protocol field: Defines the transport protocol.
■■ Interface: For a firewall with three or more ports, which interface 
of the firewall the packet came from or which interface of the firewall 
the packet is destined for.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 7
Firewall
Packet Filtering Firewall
The packet filter is typically set up as a list of rules based on 
matches to fields in the IP or TCP header. If there is a match to 
one of the rules, that rule is invoked to determine whether to 
forward or discard the packet. If there is no match to any rule, 
then a default action is taken. 
Two default policies are possible:
■■ Default = discard: That which is not expressly permitted is  
prohibited.
■■ Default = forward: That which is not expressly prohibited is 
permitted.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 8
Firewall
Packet Filtering Firewall
A. Inbound mail is allowed (port 25 is for SMTP incoming), but only to a gateway host. 
However, packets from a particular external host, SPIGOT, are blocked because that 
host has a history of sending massive files in e-mail messages.
B. This is an explicit statement of the default policy. All rule sets include this rule 
implicitly as the last rule.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 9
Firewall
Packet Filtering Firewall
C. This rule set is intended to specify that any inside host can send mail to 
the outside. A TCP packet with a destination port of 25 is routed to the 
SMTP server on the destination machine. 
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 10
Firewall
Packet Filtering Firewall
One advantage of a packet filtering firewall is its simplicity. Also, packet filters 
typically are transparent to users and are very fast. 
However, packet filters have the following weaknesses:
▪ Because packet filter firewalls do not examine upper-layer data, they cannot 
prevent attacks that employ application-specific vulnerabilities or functions.
▪ Most packet filter firewalls do not support advanced user authentication schemes. 
Once again, this limitation is mostly due to the lack of upper-layer functionality by 
the firewall.
▪ Packet filter firewalls are generally vulnerable to attacks and exploits that take 
advantage of problems within the TCP/IP specification and protocol stack, such as 
network layer address spoofing. Spoofing attacks are generally employed by 
intruders to bypass the security controls implemented in a firewall platform.
▪ Finally, due to the small number of variables used in access control decisions, 
packet filter firewalls are susceptible to security breaches caused by improper 
configurations. In other words, it is easy to accidentally configure a packet filter 
firewall to allow traffic types, sources, and destinations that should be denied based 
on an organization’s information security policy.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 11
Firewall
Stateful Inspection Firewall
A stateful inspection packet firewall tightens up the rules for TCP traffic 
by creating a directory of outbound TCP connections, as shown in Table
There is an entry for each currently established connection. The packet filter will now allow incoming traffic 
to high-numbered ports only for those packets that fit the profile of one of the entries in this directory
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 12
Firewall
Application
Level Proxy Firewall
▪ An application-level proxy firewall, also called an Application 
Level Gateway, acts as a relay of application-level traffic. 
▪ The user contacts the gateway using a TCP/IP application and the 
gateway asks the user for the name of the remote host to be 
accessed. 
▪ When the user responds and provides a valid user ID and 
authentication information, the gateway contacts the application 
on the remote host and relays TCP segments containing the 
application data between the two endpoints. 
▪ If the gateway does not implement the proxy code for a specific 
application, the service is not supported and cannot be forwarded 
across the firewall. 
▪ Further, the gateway can be configured to support only specific 
features of an application that the network administrator 
considers acceptable while denying all other features.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 13
Firewall
Circuit
Level Proxy Firewall
▪ A fourth type of firewall is the circuit-level gateway or 
circuit-level proxy. This can be a stand-alone system or it 
can be a specialized function performed by an application
level gateway for certain applications. 
▪ As with an application gateway, a circuit-level gateway does 
not permit an end-to-end TCP connection; rather, the 
gateway sets up two TCP connections, one between itself and 
a TCP user on an inner host and one between itself and a 
TCP user on an outside host. 
▪ Once the two connections are established, the gateway 
typically relays TCP segments from one connection to the 
other without examining the contents. 
▪ The security function consists of determining which 
connections will be allowed.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 14
DMZ Networks
(DeMilitarized Zone)
▪ An external firewall is placed at the edge of a 
local or enterprise network, just inside the 
boundary router that connects to the Internet or 
some wide area network (WAN). 
▪ One or more internal firewalls protect the bulk 
of the enterprise network. 
▪ Between these two types of firewalls are one 
or more networked devices in a region referred 
to as a demilitarized zone (DMZ) network. 
Systems that are externally accessible but need 
some protections are usually located on DMZ 
networks.
▪ Typically, the systems in the DMZ require 
external connectivity, such as a Web server, an 
email server, or a domain name system (DNS) 
server.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 15
DMZ Networks
(DeMilitarized Zone)
▪ The external firewall provides a 
measure of access control and 
protection for the DMZ systems 
consistent with their need for external 
connectivity. 
▪ The external firewall also provides a 
basic level of protection for the 
remainder of the enterprise network.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 16
DMZ Networks
(DeMilitarized Zone)
▪ The internal firewall adds more stringent filtering 
capability, compared to the external firewall, in order 
to protect enterprise servers and workstations from 
external attack.
▪ The internal firewall provides two-way protection with 
respect to the DMZ. First, the internal firewall protects 
the remainder of the network from attacks launched 
from DMZ systems. Such attacks might originate from 
worms, rootkits, bots, or other malware lodged in a 
DMZ system. Second, an internal firewall can protect 
the DMZ systems from attack from the internal 
protected network.
▪ Internal firewalls can be used to protect portions of the 
internal network from each other. For example, 
firewalls can be configured so that internal servers are 
protected from internal workstations and vice versa. 
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 17
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Intrusion
: 
Violations of security policy, usually characterized as attempts to affect the confidentiality, 
integrity, or availability of a computer or network. These violations can come from 
attackers accessing systems from the Internet or from authorized users of the systems who 
attempt to overstep their legitimate authorization levels or who use their legitimate access to 
the system to conduct unauthorized activity.
Intrusion
detection: 
The process of collecting information about events occurring in a computer system or 
network and analyzing them for signs of intrusions.
Intrusion
detection system: 
Hardware or software products that gather and analyze information from various areas 
within a computer or a network for the purpose of finding, and providing real-time or near
real-time warning of, attempts to access system resources in an unauthorized manner.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 18
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
An IDS comprises three logical components:
Sensors
: 
Sensors are responsible for collecting data. The input for a sensor may be any part of a 
system that could contain evidence of an intrusion. Types of input to a sensor include 
network packets, log files, and system call traces. Sensors collect and forward this 
information to the analyzer.
Analyzers
: 
Analyzers receive input from one or more sensors or from other analyzers. The analyzer is 
responsible for determining if an intrusion has occurred. The output of this component is 
an indication that an intrusion has occurred. The output may include evidence supporting 
the conclusion that an intrusion occurred. The analyzer may provide guidance about what 
actions to take as a result of the intrusion.
User
interface: 
The user interface to an IDS enables a user to view output from the system or control the 
behavior of the system. In some systems, the user interface may report to a manager, 
director, or console component.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 19
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Approaches to Intrusion Detection
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 20
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Approaches to Intrusion Detection
Misuse detection is based on rules that specify 
system events, sequences of events, or observable 
properties of a system that are believed to be 
indication of security incidents. 
Misuse detectors use various pattern-matching 
algorithms, operating on large databases of attack 
patterns, or signatures. 
▪ An advantage of misuse detection is that it is 
accurate and generates few false alarms. 
▪ A disadvantage is that it cannot detect novel or 
unknown attacks.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 21
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Approaches to Intrusion Detection
Anomaly detection searches for activity that is 
different from the normal behavior of system 
entities and system resources. 
▪ An advantage of anomaly detection is that it is 
able to detect previously unknown attacks 
based on an audit of activity. 
▪ A disadvantage is that there is a significant 
trade-off between false positives and false 
negatives.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 22
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Approaches to Intrusion Detection
Although the typical behavior of an 
intruder differs from the typical behavior 
of an authorized user, there is an overlap 
in these behaviors.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 23
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Approaches to Intrusion Detection
▪ A loose interpretation of intruder behavior, 
which will catch more intruders, will also 
lead to a number of false positives, or 
authorized users identified as intruders. 
▪ On the other hand, an attempt to limit false 
positives by a tight interpretation of intruder 
behavior will lead to an increase in false 
negatives, or intruders not identified as 
intruders. 
Thus, there is a compromise and art in the 
practice of anomaly detection
Here is the role of AI
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 24
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) can be classified as follows:
Host-based IDS: 
Monitors the characteristics of a single host and the events occurring within that host for 
suspicious activity. This allows host-based IDSs to determine exactly which processes and 
user accounts are involved in a particular attack on the OS. 
Furthermore, unlike network-based IDSs, host-based IDSs can see the intended outcome 
of an attempted attack, because they can directly access and monitor the data files and 
system processes usually targeted by attacks.
Network-based IDS: 
Monitors network traffic for particular network segments or devices and analyzes 
network, transport, and application protocols to identify suspicious activity.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 25
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Host
Based 
Intrusion 
Detection System
▪ Host-based IDSs add a specialized layer of security software to vulnerable or sensitive 
systems; examples include database servers and administrative systems.
▪ The host-based IDS monitors activity on the system in a variety of ways to detect 
suspicious behavior. In some cases, an IDS can halt an attack before any damage is done, 
but its primary purpose is to detect intrusions, log suspicious events, and send alerts.
▪ The primary benefit of a host-based IDS is that it can detect both external and internal 
intrusions, something that is not possible either with network-based IDSs or firewalls.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 26
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Host
Based 
Intrusion 
Detection System
Host-based IDSs use one or a combination of anomaly and misuse protection.
For
anomaly detection, two common strategies are:
Threshold
detection: 
This approach involves defining thresholds, independent of user, for the frequency of 
occurrence of various events.
Profile
based: 
A profile of the activity of each user is developed and used to detect changes in the 
behavior of individual accounts.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 27
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Network
Based 
Intrusion 
Detection System (NIDS)
▪ Network-based ID involves looking at the packets on the 
network as they pass by some sensor. 
▪ Packets are considered to be of interest if they match a 
signature.
▪ Three primary types of signatures are string signatures, port 
signatures, and header condition signatures.
▪ String signatures look for a text string that indicates a possible 
attack.
▪ Port signatures simply watch for connection attempts to well 
known, frequently attacked ports.
▪ Header signatures watch for dangerous or illogical 
combinations in packet headers.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 28
Intrusion Detection 
System (IDS)
Network
Based 
Intrusion 
Detection System (NIDS)
An NIDS sensor can only see the packets 
that happen to be carried on the network 
segment to which it is attached. 
Accordingly, NIDS deployment is typically 
set up as a number of sensors distributed on 
key network points to gather traffic data and 
feed information on potential threats to a 
central NIDS manager.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 29
Intrusion Detection System (IDS)
Network
Based 
Intrusion 
Detection System (NIDS)
There are four types of locations for the sensors:
1. Outside the main enterprise firewall. Useful for establishing 
the level of threat for a given enterprise network. 
2. In the network DMZ (inside the main firewall but outside 
internal firewalls). This location can monitor for penetration 
attempts that target Web and other services generally open to 
outsiders.
3. Behind internal firewalls, positioned to monitor major 
backbone networks, such as those that support internal servers 
and database resources.
4. Behind internal firewalls, positioned to monitor LANs that 
support user workstations. 
Locations 3 and 4 can monitor for more specific attacks at 
network segments, and attacks from inside the organization.
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 30
Cybersecurity Fundamentals
CCY
2001: Introduction to Cybersecurity
Dr. Ehab Abousaif
PhD in Electrical and Computer Eng., University of Idaho, USA
IEEE member, IMAPS member
College of Computing and Information Technology, AASTMT
Cell:       
01114757888
Email:    ehabkamel@gmail.com
Copyrights ©Dr. Ehab Abousaif - Topic: 7 Network Endpoint Security - 31